Evaluation metrics
==================

This section describes the complete workflow for computing ten spatial transcriptomics benchmark metrics, embedding configurations of all compared methods, and standardized error handling strategies. Script ‘spatial_metrics.py’ contains core metric functions, while the ‘metrics_benchmark.py’ serve as the main executor for batch metric computation. In total, ten evaluation metrics are divided into biological preservation metrics (SCS, Moran’s I, Geary’s C, cLISI, ASW_domain, ARI) and batch correction metrics (GC, iLISI, kBET, ASW_batch).

3.1 Pre-cleaning and Outlier/Missing Value Correction
------------------------------
All input matrices (raw expression matrix, latent embedding matrices) undergo standardized sanitization via a unified clean_matrix function before any metric computation to eliminate invalid numerical values and format inconsistencies:

Sparse matrices are converted to float32 COO format and re-transformed to CSR format for efficient computation; dense arrays are cast to float32 NumPy arrays with copy protection to avoid modifying original data. All NaN, positive infinity and negative infinity entries are uniformly replaced with 0 using np.nan_to_num, removing extreme outliers and corrupted floating-point values that would break downstream statistical calculations. Spatial coordinates are copied to a dedicated cleaned raw AnnData container to guarantee spatial graph construction access. After processing each sample, the AnnData object is explicitly deleted, and garbage collection is triggered to prevent memory overflow during batch processing of high-dimensional spatial transcriptomics data.

3.2 Standardized Annotation Key Definition
----

Four critical annotation keys are predefined for every batch-removal method to unify label input across all ten metrics, with consistent semantic definitions:

**batch_key**: Column name in adata.obs storing batch/slice identity labels, used exclusively for batch-effect evaluation metrics (iLISI, kBET, ASW_batch).

**celltype_key**: Ground-truth annotation column in adata.obs, serving as the biological reference for spatial autocorrelation, clustering consistency and biological preservation metrics (Moran’s I, Geary’s C, ARI, GC, cLISI, kBET, ASW_domain).

**cluster_key**: Algorithm-derived domain/cluster label column in adata.obs, representing spatial partitions generated by each integration method, required for SCS and ARI calculation.

**use_rep**: The key of latent embedding matrix stored in adata.obsm, which provides low-dimensional corrected features for all scib-based metrics, and supports optional embedding-based spatial autocorrelation computation for Moran’s I and Geary’s C.

3.3 Calculation Workflow
-----

3.3.1 Biological Preservation Metrics (Bio Metrics)
~~~~

To evaluate whether the integration methods preserved biologically meaningful variation and spatial structures, 
we employed six complementary metrics:

①Spatial Coherence Score (SCS)

We quantified the spatial organization of clustering assignments by computing the spatial entropy of label distributions within local neighborhoods. For each spot, we identified its k-nearest neighbors (degree=4) based on Euclidean distances in spatial coordinates (scipy.spatial.NearestNeighbors). The co-occurrence matrix of cluster labels between each spot and its neighbors was constructed, and the Shannon entropy was calculated as a measure of spatial disorder. To establish a baseline distribution, we performed 1,000 permutations of random label shuffling (rep_time=1000, seed=0) and computed the SCS as the standardized Z-score. Lower SCS values indicate stronger spatial coherence, as the observed spatial organization deviates more significantly from random expectation.

To mitigate scaling imbalances caused by the wide range of Spatial Consistency Scores (SCS), we applied Sigmoid normalization to ensure scores fall within the [0, 1] interval:

:math:`\mathrm{SCS}_{\mathrm{norm}} = \frac{1}{1 + e^{k \times \mathrm{SCS}}}`

where (k = 0.015). This transformation compresses extreme values and retains the relative difference of raw SCS across different algorithms.

②Moran’s I and Geary’s C

Moran's I and Geary's C: To assess global spatial autocorrelation of gene expression patterns, we computed both Moran's I and Geary's C statistics using squidpy.gr.spatial_autocorr with 100 permutations (n_perms=100). The analysis was performed in two complementary modes:

(a) Embedding-based mode: We directly computed spatial autocorrelation on the method-generated low-dimensional representations , evaluating whether the corrected embeddings preserved spatial structure.

(b) Gene-based mode: For each cell type, we identified differentially expressed genes via Wilcoxon rank-sum test and selected the top 3 genes with highest log-fold changes. Moran's I and Geary's C were then calculated on these representative genes, serving as a biological baseline reference.

Moran's I ranges from -1 to 1, with positive values indicating positive spatial autocorrelation, and higher values indicating clearer spatial expression patterns. Geary's C ranges from 0 to 2, with values below 1 indicating positive spatial autocorrelation, and lower values indicating greater similarity between neighboring spots. To enhance robustness against outliers, we reported the median values across all analyzed genes for both statistics.

Any runtime error emerging during either embedding-based or gene-based mode will assign np.nan to both Moran’s I and Geary’s C metrics synchronously. Our final analysis used the embedding-based mode. For visualization and unified ranking, Geary’s C values were inverted (2 - Geary’s C) to ensure higher values consistently represent stronger spatial autocorrelation.

③Cell-type Local Inverse Simpson's Index (cLISI)

Using `scib.me.clisi_graph`, we computed the effective number of cell types in local neighborhoods. 
Higher cLISI values indicate greater cell type diversity within local regions, 
reflecting successful preservation of biological heterogeneity and spatial mixing of different cell populations.

④Average Silhouette Width for Cell Type (ASW_domain)

We applied `scib.me.silhouette` to evaluate the separation between different cell types in the integrated embedding space. Higher ASW_domain values indicate better biological separation, as cells of the same type cluster more tightly while different types remain distinct.

⑤Adjusted Rand Index (ARI)

We assessed the agreement between clustering results and ground-truth anatomical annotations using `scib.me.ari`. 
ARI ranges from -1 to 1, with values closer to 1 indicating perfect concordance with reference annotations.

3.3.2 Batch Effect Correction Metrics (Batch Metrics)
~~~~

To evaluate the effectiveness of batch effect removal, 
we utilized the scIB (single-cell integration benchmark) toolkit with four established metrics, 
all computed on the method-specific low-dimensional representations (`use_rep`) after constructing a neighborhood graph 
with `n_neighbors=15` and `random_state=seed`:

①Graph Connectivity (GC)

We measured the connectivity of the k-nearest neighbor graph for each cell type across different batches via `scib.me.graph_connectivity (label_key=config["celltype_key"])`. This metric evaluates whether cells of the same type remain connected in the integrated space, with values approaching 1 indicating perfect batch integration without disrupting biological structure.

②Integrated Local Inverse Simpson's Index (iLISI)

Using `scib.me.ilisi_graph (batch_key=config["batch_key"], type_="embed", use_rep=use_rep)`, we computed the effective number of batches in local neighborhoods. Higher iLISI values indicate better batch mixing, as cells from different batches are uniformly distributed within local regions. 

③kBET (k-nearest neighbor Batch Effect Test)

We applied `scib.me.kBET (batch_key=config["batch_key"], label_key=config["celltype_key"], type_="embed", embed=use_rep)`  to test the uniformity of batch label distributions within local neighborhoods using a chi-squared test. Higher kBET values (approaching 1) indicate successful batch effect removal, as the batch composition in each neighborhood matches the global batch distribution.

④Average Silhouette Width for Batch (ASW_batch)

Using `scib.me.silhouette_batch(batch_key=config["batch_key"], label_key=config["celltype_key"], embed=use_rep)`, we calculated the silhouette coefficient measuring batch separation. In contrast to other metrics, lower ASW_batch values indicate better batch mixing, as ideal integration should minimize batch-specific clustering.

